GROUP ASSIGNMENT

Data Structures-methods of organizing and storing data so that it can be accessed and modified efficiently.
Algorithms-step-by-step procedures used to manipulate these data structures to solve real-world problems.

In modern computing systems, operating systems, AI systems, databases and web applications require efficient data structures and algorithms to enhance performance, reliability and scalability.

Classifications of data structures
Primitive data structures
non primitive data structures
linear data structure
non linear data structure

primitive data structures.-store single values and form the building blocks of all other data structures ....they are fast and memory efficient


2.Linear data structures
a.Array...static linear data structure

applications..image processing, matrices, fixed size data storage

algorithm used...Sorting...a method used to arrange a list or array of elements into a specific order, such as numerical or alphabetical, in a non-decreasing or non-increasing sequence.

b.linked lists They are linear data structures in which elements are stored in non-contagious  memory locations.
They are dynamic in size.
They are in forms of:
a)singly linked lists
b)doubly linked lists
c)circular linked lists

a) Singly linked lists
They travel in only one direction.
They can be applied in;
music playlists, browser history, implementing queues and stacks
b) Doubly linked lists
Travels in both directions
They apply in; undo and redo operations, forward and backward browsing ,navigation systems
c)Circular linked lists
Last node points back to the start
They apply in; CPU scheduling,multiplayer games turn system,circular buffers


Applications -Dynamic memory management, Playlists, Undo/Redo operations

c.stack ...ie Using Array


applications -web page Navigation...Function calls, Expression evaluation, Backtracking algorithms

algorithm used...DFS..depth first search....a fundamental algorithm for traversing or searching tree and graph data structures, exploring as far as possible along each branch before backtracking. Utilizing a stack...or recursion to manage nodes, it systematically visits all reachable vertices by going deep into one path, hitting a dead end, and backtracking, with a time complexity of (O(V+E)).

The notation O(V + E) in the context of the Depth-First Search (DFS) algorithm represents its time complexity, which is a measure of the total time the algorithm takes to run relative to the size of the graph it is traversing.
O stands for "Big O" notation, which describes the upper bound or worst-case running time of an algorithm.
V represents the number of vertices (nodes) in the graph.
E represents the number of edges (connections) in the graph.

d.Queue...Using Array

Application...CPU scheduling, Network buffering, Printer queues

algorithm used....BFS...Breadth-First Search...a graph traversal algorithm that explores nodes level-by-level, starting from a root, by examining all direct neighbors at the current depth before moving to the next level. It uses a queue to manage node exploration, guaranteeing the shortest path in unweighted graphs...
:/
NON-LINEAR DATA STRUCTURES
Tree....Binary TreeTrees are a fundamental data structure in computer science, and they're used in a wide range of applications. Essentially, a Tree is a hierarchical structure composed of nodes, where each node has a value and zero or more child nodes. There are different types of Trees, including Binary Trees, AVL Trees, and B-Trees, each with its own strengths and use cases.

One of the key benefits of Trees is their efficiency. They allow for fast data retrieval and insertion, making them a popular choice for applications where data is constantly being added or queried. For example, file systems use Trees to organize and manage files and directories, while databases use them to index and query large datasets.

Trees are also used in web development, where the Document Object Model (DOM) is essentially a Tree-like structure. This allows developers to easily navigate and manipulate the HTML elements on a webpage. Additionally, Trees are used in algorithms for tasks such as sorting and searching, where their hierarchical structure can be leveraged to reduce the number of comparisons needed.

Here's an example of a simple Binary Tree implemented in Python:
class Node:
    def __init__(self, value):
        self.left = None
        self.right = None
        self.value = value

root = Node(1)
root.left = Node(2)
root.right = Node(3)
This implementation provides a basic structure for creating and manipulating a Binary Tree. From here, you could add methods for inserting and traversing the Tree, or use it as a starting point for more complex Tree-based data structures.

Overall, Trees are a powerful and versatile data structure that's worth understanding. Whether you're working on a small project or a large-scale application, they're likely to come in handy at some point. By understanding how Trees work and how to use them effectively, you can write more efficient and effective code.

applications...File systems, Database indexing, Expression trees
algorithm used...Traversal algorithm...


2. Graph...Adjacency Matrix Representation


applications,,,,Social networks, Routing algorithms, Maps and navigation systems...that is in google maps

algorithm used ....Dijkstra

How Data Structures and Algorithms Work Within Systems

1. What Happens Inside a System..
Every computer system has three main parts which are
Input
Processing
Output
Data Structures and Algorithms work mainly in the processing stage.Databases: Trees provide fast searching and indexing.

2.Role of Algorithms in a System
An algorithm is...
A step-by-step procedure to solve a problem.
In systems, algorithms...
Search data
Sort data
Insert/Delete data
Calculate results
eg..Searching in a System
If a system stores 1 million students without algorithm it would check each student one by one (slow).With Binary Search Algorithm,Data stored in sorted array,hence Search time becomes very fast Using divide and conquer method
That’s how systems remain efficient. in Compilers, Trees represent program structure.
3.How They Work in Memory.In computer memory,RAM stores data structures.
Example
If you create an array,Memory allocated continuously
If you create linked list,Memory allocated dynamically
Nodes stored in different locations
So systems choose data structures depending on:
Memory efficiency,Speed,Flexibility

4.Real System Examples
A. Google Search Engine
Data Structures:Trees,Graphs
Algorithms:Ranking algorithms,Search algorithms
How it works:
Webpages stored in structured form
Search algorithm finds relevant pages
Results ranked and displayed
B. WhatsApp
Data Structures:Queue (message delivery),Graph (contacts network)
Algorithms:Encryption algorithm,Message routing
How it works:
Message stored in queue,Routed through servers,Delivered in order (FIFO)
C. Operating System
Data Structures:Queue (CPU scheduling),Stack (function calls)
Algorithms:Scheduling algorithms,Memory allocation algorithms
Example: When multiple programs are running,They are placed in a queue
OS schedules them one by one

Giving Real Applications Using Data Structures + Algorithms
1. Google Maps
Data Structure... Graph
Algorithm...Dijkstra’s Algorithm
Use... Finding shortest routes
Reason..Finds the fastest and shortest path between two places.

2. Web Browsers
Data Structure... Stack
Algorithm ...Undo / Back Algorithm
Use..Back and forward navigation
Reason...Last opened page is accessed first (LIFO).

3. Operating System
Data Structure..Queue
Algorithm.. Round Robin Scheduling
Use.. CPU process scheduling
Reason.. Executes processes in order of arrival (FIFO).

4. Text Editors
Data Structure.. Stack
Algorithm.. Undo/Redo
Use.. Undo and redo typing actions
Reason.. Easily reverses last action.

4. Text Editors
Data Structure... Stack
Algorithm... Undo/Redo
Use...Undo and redo typing actions
Reason... Easily reverses last action.

5. Databases
Data Structure... Tree
Algorithm... Binary Search
Use...Fast searching of records
Reason....Speeds up data searching.

6. Social Media
Data Structure... Graph
Algorithm...Breadth First Search (BFS)
Use... Friend suggestions

Reason... Finds mutual connections.

